From: Moon-Net
--------------
Below is a more technical view of the EVE event in Bochum this week,
taken from another reflector. More details could be found soon on the
given AMSAT site.

73 de Ulli, DL3YEL
-------------------------------------------------------------------
Original material:

http://freenet-homepage.de/dl4yhf/speclab/earth_venus_earth.htm#success_on_2G4

-------------------------------------------------------------------
Hi James, Rik, Alberto and the group,

Yes an impressive distance.. even though the ERP was a bit above the usual
value for amateur radio on 13 cm. AMSAT-DL has applied for, and been granted,
a special permission for this experiment which expires at the end of this
year.

The *principle* was simple:
 - send a 5 minute carrier on 2.45x GHz, then
 - receive for 5 minutes, remove impulse noise (WLAN), run the signal through
   an FFT with ~11 Hz equivalent receiver bandwidth
 - add all received power spectra to calculate an average (*)
 - repeat the above until the sigma (standard deviation) in the frequency bins
   gets low enough to see the weak reflection in one of those bins.
 - while transmitting, keep the frequency constant to one or two Hz (not as
   easy as it sounds)
 - while receiving, permanently compensate the Doppler shift (which a
   marvellous piece of software by G3RUH did)
 - during the experiment, keep the dish pointed to Venus with an accuracy
   better than 0.1? (which another piece of software by G3RUH did)
 - hope that the 5-kW magnetron, and the cooling system (including a vaccum
   cleaner and a water cooler from a VW Polo) holds..

(*) A single FFT is not sufficient to lift the signal out of the noise. It
was between 8 and 11 dB below the noise in a 10 Hz bandwidth; the ratio of
<signal plus noise> to <noise> was between 0.3 and 0.4 dB; the latter
measured today when it wasn't raining. This was sufficient to "see" the
signal after 2 minutes, so we didn't have to average over consecutive 5-
minute-receive intervals.

Each dot of the "HI"-message lasted 5 minutes, because that's the approximate
travelling time... in other words, "QRSS300" dictated by Venus ;-)

Details, including the "Magnetron taming" circuit by DJ4ZC will appear in
English language on www.amsat-dl.org hopefully soon. This vital part of the
system includes 3 PLL circuits, a servo motor controller for the coarse
frequency control (slow mechanical tuning, 6 MHz, on the output waveguide),
and a fast controlling loop with about 1.5 MHz (iirc) loop bandwidth which
involves 2 * 4CX1000 for the 'faster' frequency control, which also provides
the SSB modulation. In fact, the energy not "used" for the SSB signal at a
given instance is 'moved away' (spread out) by 15 kHz to both sides of the
center frequency. Maybe some of these principles can be used in class-D
amplifiers for other frequencies, which finally takes us back to LF / MF-
related topics <g> .


Cheers,
 Wolf DL4YHF . 
